initial verbs description (#906)
bluesky/ophyd-async: docs/explanations/plan-stubs.md

# What plan stubs will do to Devices

Plan authors will typically compose [plan stubs](inv:bluesky#stub_plans) together to get the behaviour they expect from their Device. These plan stubs will yield Messages to the RunEngine which calls methods on the Device. This document lists some commonly used plan stubs, what Devices will do when they are called, and how they should be ordered inside the plan.

```{seealso}
[](./flyscanning.md) for more information on the differences between software driven scans and hardware driven flyscans
```

## Plan stubs

### [`bps.stage`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.stage) and [`bps.unstage`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.unstage)

These are typically the first and last Messages in the plan:

> - `stage` gets the Device into an idle state then makes it ready for data collection:

Reviewer: English descriptor. Means not doing anything.

  - For Devices that read from Signals this will start monitoring those Signals

>   - For detectors that write to a resource (like an HDF file) this will indicate that any data should be stored in a fresh resource

Reviewer: it refers to an English word rather than a Python class, so probably stick with lowercase?

These are typically the second and second last Messages in the plan:
- `open_run` indicates the start of a data collection
   - For detectors this may cause the `PathProvider` to calculate a new filename to write into
- `close_run` indicates the end of a data collection

Typically applied using the [`bpp.run_decorator`](#bluesky.preprocessors.run_decorator) on the plan, after the `stage_decorator`.

### [`bps.prepare`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.prepare)

Prepares the device for a `trigger` or `kickoff`, after `stage` and `open_run`:
- For detectors this will set parameters such as exposure time and number of frames. If hardware triggering is requested it will also arm the detector.
- For motors this will move to the run up position and setup the requested motion velocity or trajectory.

### [`bps.abs_set`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.abs_set) or [`bps.mv`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.mv)

Set the device to a target setpoint:
- For motors this will move the motor to the desired position. 

### [`bps.trigger`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.trigger)

Ask the detector to take a single exposure. 

### [`bps.read`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.read)

> Collect the data from a detector after `trigger`. 

Author: confusing with `bps.rd` - what is the difference?

### [`bps.kickoff`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.kickoff)

> Begin a flyscan:

Author: I notice another dimension here across the commands - they have not just different context (hardware and software scans) but also we know of specific different behaviours for them depending on whether the target is a detector or a motor

> Begin a flyscan:

Reviewer: how do you suggest presenting this, rewriting the whole doc as a table, or just some section of it?

> Begin a flyscan:

Reviewer: Please can you add this as a summary section at the end of the doc

> - For motors this will start motion and return once at velocity

Author: `return once at velocity` - what does this mean?

- For detectors prepared for software triggering this will start the acquisition

```{note}
Motors should be kicked off before detectors so that software triggered detectors don't start too early. Hardware triggered detectors will already be armed from `prepare`.

> ```

Author: does this mean this is down to the users? can be prevent this mistake on the code level?

### [`bps.complete`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.collect) and [`bps.collect`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.collect)

Wait for flyscanning to be done, collecting data from detectors periodically while that happens:
- `complete` waits for a flyscan to be done:
  - For motors this will wait until motion including ramp down is complete
  - For detectors this will wait until the requested number of frames has been written
- `collect` collects the data that has been written so far by a detector during a flyscan.

Typically called via [`bps.collect_while_completing`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.collect_while_completing), after `kickoff`.

## Ordering

Some scans only have a software driven component, some only have hardware driven components, and some mix both together. This section lists the ordering of these scans.

### Purely software driven scan

> After `stage` and `open_run`, an optional `prepare` sets up detectors for a given exposure time. The inner loop `set`s motors, then `trigger`s and `read`s detectors for each point. Finally `close_run` and `unstage` do the cleanup.

Author: 'optional' - imo every conditional like that should include a pointer what to consider if I need it. here it could be 'if there are dectectors that need an exposure time specified then we can call `prepare` after `open_run`.

```{mermaid}
:config: { "theme": "neutral" }
:align: center
flowchart TD
    stage["stage dets, motors"] --> open_run
    open_run --> prepare["(opt) prepare dets"]
    prepare --> set["set motors"]
    set --> trigger["trigger dets"]
    trigger --> read["read dets"]
    read --> set
    read --> close_run
    close_run --> unstage["unstage dets, motors"]

```

### Purely hardware driven scan

> After `stage` and `open_run`, `prepare` sets up detectors for hardware triggering and motors for a trajectory and `kickoff` starts them off going. Then `complete` is called on motors and detectors and the detectors will be `collect`ed repeatedly until it finishes. Finally `close_run` and `unstage` do the cleanup.

Author: > starts them off going

redundant expression. `kickoff tells the detectors to start the pre-configured acquisition series` (?)

> hen `complete` is called on motors and detectors and the detectors will be `collect`ed repeatedly until it finishes. 

this would be clearer into 2 sentences

```{mermaid}
:config: { "theme": "neutral" }
:align: center
flowchart TD
    stage["stage dets, motors"] --> open_run
    open_run --> prepare["prepare dets, motors"]
    prepare --> kickoff["kickoff dets, motors"]
    kickoff --> complete["complete dets, motors"]
    complete --> collect["collect dets"]
    collect --> collect
    collect ----> close_run
    close_run --> unstage["unstage dets, motors"]
```

### Mixed software and hardware driven scan

> After `stage` and `open_run` the detectors are `prepare`d for the entire scan. The inner loop `set`s the slow (software) motors to each point, then does a `prepare`, `kickoff`, `complete` of the fast (hardware) motors, `collect`ing from the detectors repeatedly until they are finished. Finally `close_run` and `unstage` do the cleanup.

Author: this is very clear and succint; do the things in the inner loop actually all happen in parallel?

- `stage` gets the Device into an idle state then makes it ready for data collection:
  - For Devices that read from Signals this will start monitoring those Signals
  - For detectors that write to a resource (e.g. an HDF file) this will indicate that any captured data (e.g. a detector frame) should be stored in a fresh resource
- `unstage` returns the Device to an idle state:
  - For Devices that read from Signals this will stop monitoring those Signals
  - For detectors that write to a resource this will close that resource

It is recommended that the [`bpp.stage_decorator`](#bluesky.preprocessors.stage_decorator) is applied to the plan to yield these Messages as they do the appropriate error handling.

### [`bps.open_run`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.open_run) and [`bps.close_run`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.close_run)

These are typically the second and second last Messages in the plan:
- `open_run` indicates to downstream consumers the start of a data collection
   - For detectors this may be used by specific implentations of `PathProvider` to calculate a new filename to write into
- `close_run` indicates the end of a data collection

> It is recommended that the [`bpp.run_decorator`](#bluesky.preprocessors.run_decorator) is applied to the plan to yield these Messages as they do the appropriate error handling. It should be placed after the `stage_decorator`.

Reviewer 2: Would be useful to give an example of the wrapping of decorators, and also that using the stage_decorator isn't possible unless you're using an inner plan when running plans in blueapi- you don't have access to the device instances only their classes. Worked example also shows what to pass to each

```python
def my_plan(...) -> MsgGenerator:
  @stage_decorator(devices)
  @run_recorator()
  def my_inner_plan() -> MsgGenerator:
    yield from []
  yield from my_inner_plan()
# etc.
```

### [`bps.open_run`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.open_run) and [`bps.close_run`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.close_run)

These are typically the second and second last Messages in the plan:
- `open_run` indicates to downstream consumers the start of a data collection
   - For detectors this may be used by specific implentations of `PathProvider` to calculate a new filename to write into
- `close_run` indicates the end of a data collection

It is recommended that the [`bpp.run_decorator`](#bluesky.preprocessors.run_decorator) is applied to the plan to yield these Messages as they do the appropriate error handling. It should be placed after the `stage_decorator`.

### [`bps.prepare`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.prepare)

Prepares the device for a `trigger` or `kickoff`, after `stage` and `open_run`:
- For detectors this will set parameters on the hardware such as exposure time and number of frames. If hardware triggering is requested it will also arm the detector so it is ready to receive those triggers.
- For motors this will move to the run up position and setup the requested motion velocity or trajectory.

> ### [`bps.abs_set`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.abs_set) or [`bps.mv`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.mv)
> 
> Set the device to a target setpoint:
> - For motors this will move the motor to the desired position, returning when it is complete and erroring if it fails to move. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### [`bps.abs_set`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.abs_set, wait =True) or [`bps.mv`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.mv)

Set the device to a target setpoint:
- For motors, `bps.mv` will move the motor to the desired position, returning when it is complete and erroring if it fails to move. **`bps.abs_set`, however, does not wait for completion by default unless the `wait` option is explicitly set to `True`.**
```

- `collect` collects the data that has been written so far by a detector during a flyscan.

Typically called via [`bps.collect_while_completing`](#bluesky.plan_stubs.collect_while_completing), after `kickoff`.

## Ordering

Plan stubs can be mixed together to form arbitrary plans, but there are certain patterns that are common in specific categories of plan. This section lists the ordering of these stubs for step scans (typically software driven), fly scans (typically hardware driven), and scans that nest a fly scan within a step scan.

### Pure step scan

After `stage` and `open_run`, `prepare` can be called to set up detectors for a given exposure time if this has been specified in the plan. The inner loop `set`s motors, then `trigger`s and `read`s detectors for each point. Finally `close_run` and `unstage` do the cleanup.

```{mermaid}
:config: { "theme": "neutral" }
:align: center
flowchart TD
    stage["stage dets, motors"] --> open_run
    open_run --> prepare["(opt) prepare dets"]
    prepare --> set["set motors"]
    set --> trigger["trigger dets"]
    trigger --> read["read dets"]
    read --> set
    read --> close_run

>     close_run --> unstage["unstage dets, motors"]

Reviewer: Consider tabs

>     close_run --> unstage["unstage dets, motors"]

Reviewer 4: For reference, I did this (using tabs to show both mermaid and code) in the past in [this page.](https://redsun-acquisition.github.io/sunflare/main/overview/in_process_model/#api-via-aggregation)
